What is Mining?
Any operation undertaken for the purpose of winning any mineral is mining. It incorporates activities like 1
pitting, digging and quarrying among others undertaken to gainfully extract a mineral from the Earth’s crust.
But mining in India is not a simple ‘dig and sell’ proposition. It is, in fact, a highly complex socio-economic
and environmental challenge: at stake are natural resources, people, forests, wildlife, water, environmental
quality and livelihoods.2
What are Minerals?
Minerals can broadly be divided into fuel (coal and lignite) and non-fuel minerals. Atomic minerals like
uranium and thorium are also fuel minerals and are primarily used in nuclear power plants to generate
electricity. Among the non-fuel minerals, again two broad distinctions can be made – metallic minerals and
non-metallic minerals. Metallic minerals are those minerals that can be melted to make new products. For
example, iron, aluminum, copper, gold, lead, zinc, silver and tin among others. They mostly exist as ‘ores’.
Non-metallic minerals are minerals that are not able to create new products after melting. Examples are
limestone, marble, mica, gypsum, dolomite and asbestos.3
What is the Significance of Mining Industry for the Indian Economy?
In 2016, the contribution of mining sector was 2.6 per cent to the GDP of India. India's growth is largely 4
attributed to the rise in its exports after liberalisation. The total value of exports (including re-exports) of all 5
merchandise in 2014-15 was 19 lakh crore. Coal accounts for around 60 per cent of all electricity p ₹ roduced
in India.6
In Which Regions of India are These Minerals Found?
Almost all the minerals in India are found in the same regions that hold its greenest forests and most
abundant river systems. These lands are also largely inhabited by India's poorest and most marginalised
people – Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes. Of the 50 major mining districts, 60 per cent figure 7
among the 150 most impoverished districts of India. In fact, mineral rich states demonstrate lower per
capita incomes compared to states with less or no minerals – a phenomenon called the 'resource curse'.
How is Mining Regulated in India?
The Constitution allocates the subject of mineral development and regulation to state governments (entry
23 in State List) subject to the law of Parliament (entry 54 in Union List). Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Act or MMDR Act, passed by the Parliament in 1957 and recently amended in 2015 and
2016 is the parent legislation for mining in India. As mandated by the MMDR Act, the union government 